.TH PKCS11SIGN 7 "2022-11-21" "pkcs11sign"
.SH NAME
pkcs11sign \- OpenSSL PKCS#11 sign provider module
.PP

.SH DESCRIPTION
The pkcs11-sign-provider implements the OpenSSL 3.0 provider interface and
provides cryptographic operation on asymmetric key material, available in
PKCS#11 infrastructure (e.g. opencryptoki). The pkcs11-sign-provider will
register a key storage for PKCS#11 URIs (RFC 7512). All keys which are
referenced by a PKCS#11 URI will be handled by the pkcs11-sign-provider.
Other keys (e.g.  file-based) are forwarded by the pkcs11-sign-provider
to another OpenSSL-Provider, e.g. the built-in OpenSSL default provider.
.PP
The pkcs11-sign-provider will only process algorithms with existing
(private) asymmetric keys in the related PKCS11-token. All other actions
will be handled by the forward-provider as clear-key operations.
.PP
The pkcs11-sign-provider does not support key creation or removal of PKCS#11
keys. For key management, external tools are required.
.PP
Supported PKCS#11 mechanisms for RSA:
.IP \[bu] 2
CKM_RSA_PKCS
.IP \[bu]
CKM_RSA_PKCS_OAEP
.IP \[bu]
CKM_RSA_PSS
.IP \[bu]
CKM_RSA_X_509
.PP
Supported PKCS#11 mechanisms for EC:
.IP \[bu] 2
CKM_ECDSA
.PP

.SH APPLICATION INTERFACE
An application, which should use asymmetric keys in PKCS#11 infrastructure,
must use an OpenSSL configuration for the pkcs11-sign-provider and refer to
the keys by an PKCS#11 URI. The rest of the application should not need any
changes.
.PP

.SS Configuration
If the system-wide OpenSSL configuration does not configure the
pkcs11-sign-provider, the application can use its own OpenSSL configuration
file and refer to it in its environment variable
.IR OPENSSL_CONF .
For more details about the configuration see pkcs11sign.cnf(5).
.PP

.SS Key references
Instead of referring to a private key file (e.g. "file:/path/to/key.pem"),
the application should use the PKCS#11 URI of the key
("pkcs11:<path-attributes>?<queue-attributes>").
.PP
The PKCS#11 URI should specify path parameters of the key, at least the ID
or label of the key, as well as its type. The key reference should be
unique.
.PP
Example for a PKCS#11 URI to a private key:
.in +4n
.EX
pkcs11:token=mytok;object=ec-key;type=private&pin-source=/path/to/token-pinfile.txt
.EE
.in
.PP
.TP
.BR Note
The current version of pkcs11-sign-provider supports only the queue
parameters
.IR pin-value " and"
.IR pin-source .
All other queue parameters are not yet supported.
.PP

.SS PIN handling
The PIN is required to login to a PKCS#11 token, to manage or work with
sensitive PKCS#11 objects (keys) and should not be proposed to anyone
without a need-to-know.
.PP
An application, which is using key material in a PKCS#11 token, has such a
need-to-know, so the PIN should be under control of the application.
.PP
The pkcs11-sign-provider supports the PIN handling in the PKCS#11 URI with
the queue attributes
.IR pin-value " and"
.IR pin-source .
While the first one contains the plain-text PIN, the latter one refers to a
file, which contains the PIN. It is highly recommended to use the file
reference and set the access permissions of the PIN file accordingly.
.PP
.SS PIN file
The PIN gives access to a PKCS#11 token and its objects (keys, certificates,
data). It should be treated as a secret information and only the application
should have access to it. With the right setup, the usage of a PIN file
provides the best protection for the PIN.
.PP
Rules for the PIN file:
.IP \[bu] 2
one PIN per PIN file
.IP \[bu]
the PIN file must only contain the PIN, no comments, no linefeed or other
characters
.IP \[bu]
the PIN file must be readable by the application
.IP \[bu]
the PIN file should not be writable by the application
.IP \[bu]
the PIN file must not be readable nor writable by other unprivileged users.
.PP
The following snippet shows, how to create a protected PIN file. It will
prompt for the PIN and write it to a file, which is only accessible for the
user.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
PINFILE="/path/to/my_pinfile.txt"
touch "${PINFILE}"
chmod u=rw,g=,o= "${PINFILE}"
(read -rsp "Enter PIN: " PIN; echo -n ${PIN}) > "${PINFILE}"
.EE
.in
.PP
If required, the file ownership can later be changed to another user and
group. This would require extra capabilities (e.g. by using "sudo").
.PP

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pkcs11sign.cnf (5),
.BR EVP (7)
.PP

.SH Copyright
Copyright \(co International Business Machines Corp. 2022, 2023
.PP
